Add validator ticket calculation (#71)
PufferFinance/website-docs: docs/validator-tickets-calculation.md

---
title: Validator Tickets Calculation
slug: /protocol/validator-tickets-calculation
---

:::info 
This page is a guide to help you understand how Validator Tickets (VTs) are calculated.
:::

### VT Consumption Calculation Summary

> The VT (Validator Tickets) consumption calculation is a critical process for managing node operators within the Puffer Protocol. This process ensures that node operators maintain sufficient VT balances to support their active and exiting validators. Here's a breakdown of how VT consumption is calculated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The VT (Validator Tickets) consumption calculation is a critical process for managing node operators within the Puffer Protocol. This process ensures that node operators maintain sufficient VT balances to support their active validators. Here's a breakdown of how VT consumption is calculated:
```

exiting might confuse people

1. **Node Operator Address Validation**: The process begins by validating the node operator's address to ensure it is in the correct format.

2. **Fetching VT Balance**: The current VT balance of the node operator is retrieved from the Puffer Protocol. This balance represents the total VTs available for consumption by the node operator's validators.

> 3. **Epoch and Validator Data Retrieval**: The latest epoch is fetched from the beacon chain, along with the list of active validators and those that have exited but not yet finalized. Active validators consume VTs daily, while exited validators may still consume VTs until they are fully finalized.

Reviewer: maybe explain `finalized` somehow, somewhere. 
Those are the validators that exited beacon chain, but the process has not been fully completed and the user did not receive the bond yet, something like that but more simple maybe

4. **VT Consumption Calculation**:
   - **Active Validators**: The total VT consumption for active validators is calculated based on the number of epochs they have been active.
   - **Exited Validators**: Similarly, the VT consumption for exited but not finalized validators is calculated for the epochs they were active until their exit.

5. **Present VT Balance Calculation**: The present VT balance is determined by subtracting the total VT consumption from the initial balance. This balance indicates the remaining VTs available to the node operator.

:::tip
Basically 1 VT is consumed daily per validator.
:::

> 6. **Minimum VT Requirement Check**: The system checks if the present VT balance meets the minimum required VTs per validator. If the balance is below this threshold, the node operator's validators may be ejected to prevent further VT consumption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Minimum VT Requirement Check**: The system checks if the present VT balance meets the minimum required VTs per validator. If the balance is below this threshold, **ALL** of the the node operator's validators will be ejected to prevent further VT consumption.
```

   - **Active Validators**: The total VT consumption for active validators is calculated based on the number of epochs they have been active.
   - **Exited Validators**: Similarly, the VT consumption for exited but not finalized validators is calculated for the epochs they were active until their exit.

5. **Present VT Balance Calculation**: The present VT balance is determined by subtracting the total VT consumption from the initial balance. This balance indicates the remaining VTs available to the node operator.

:::tip
Basically 1 VT is consumed daily per validator.
:::

6. **Minimum VT Requirement Check**: The system checks if the present VT balance meets the minimum required VTs per validator. If the balance is below this threshold, **ALL** of the the node operator's validators will be ejected to prevent further VT consumption.

### When Do We Eject?

Ejection of validators is a critical process in the Puffer Protocol to ensure the stability and integrity of the network. Validators are ejected under specific conditions related to their VT (Validator Ticket) balance. Here's a detailed explanation of when ejection occurs:

1. **Low VT Balance Detection**:

>    - The system continuously monitors the VT balance of node operators. If the balance falls below a predefined threshold, it triggers a potential ejection process.

Reviewer 2: I think that it is covered in part big note 1 VT is consumed per validator a day.
As part of the threshold I can add an explanation that is defined by us. We still didn't decided what that threshold number is.
